BUGFIXS.md, before:

# Bug Fixes

## Level 2 Basic

Affect both Model 1 and Model 3 See - 
[TRS-80 ROM Errors - Vernon Hester](https://www.trs-80.com/sub-rom-bugs.htm) - for further details.

### Error 1 - Line breaks printing numbers in 32 Char Mode

When BASIC prints an unformatted number, BASIC prints keeps the number on one video,
line. However, in the 32 character mode the rule is violated.

#### Resolution

The issue is caused because the variable LINLEN (stored at $409D) - holds the number of 
characters per line - is never updated when entering 32 character mode, it remains at 64, 
so routines that use this variable, will be affected.

The fix requires this variable to be updated when entering ($04F6) and exiting ($04C0) 
32 character mode. These routines will include the instruction  `out (vidcmt),a` which 
is updating the hardware register (IO port $FF) that controls 32 character mode.

Replacing the last two instructions 

```
out	(vidcmt),a
ret
```

with a `JP DSPLINLTH` (below) fixes the issue.

Noting for one of the routines ($04F6) the order of instructions has to be modified 
so the last 2 instruction match those above. This was easy enough to do, since the 
other instructions ($0500-$0504) being moved are independent 

The new routine being jumped to is.

```
DSPLINLTH:
	out	(vidcmt),a	; Continue from called code setting the HW register
	and	CAST32		; check if 32 char mode
	ld	a,64		; assume 64 line length
	jr	z,DSPLINLTH1	; Jump if 64
	ld	a,32		; set 32 line length
DSPLINLTH1:
	ld	(LINLEN),a	; update line length register
	ret
```

This fix requires 14 bytes 

Test Program -> Should display number without breaks

```
10 CLS:PRINT CHR$(23);
20 FOR X = 12345 TO 12350:PRINT X;:NEXT
```

### Error 5 - INT(DoubleValue) rounding issue

EXPECTATION: INT(value) should produce a result equal to or less than value.
However, if the value is double-precision (by definition), the ROM rounds value
to single-precision first, then performs the INT function. e.g.

```
PRINT INT(2.9999999) 
```
Produces `3` instead of `2`.

#### Resolution

Address 08A7 change `CALL NC,CONSD` to `NOP`'s

### Error 7 - Space after Type declaration Tag

In Basic spaces have no significance (except in messages to be printed).
When processing a statement with a type declaration tag after a number and a space before :
* 7A - An add or subtract -> the operator is applied as a unary operator for next argument
* 7B - A multiply or divide -> Syntax error.

#### Resolution

Modify the ROM to skip spaces after consuming the suffix, advancing HL past them.
Replacing the following code ($0EF2)

```
INFINE:	inc	hl
		jr	FINE	
```
With
```
INFINE:	JP	INFINEFIX
```
And adding a new routine 
```
INFINEFIX:
	inc	hl		; next program byte
	ld	a,(hl)		; get program byte
	cp	SPACE		; Is it a space
	jp 	nz,FINE		; NO - Exit and Continue
	jr	INFINEFIX	; loop around
```
This requires about 9 extra bytes

Test Program -> Should consistently display a single result - regardless of the spaces

```
5 N=3
10 PRINT 2#+N
11 PRINT 2# +N
12 PRINT 2#+ N
20 PRINT 2# + N
30 PRINT 2#*N
31 PRINT 2# *N
32 PRINT 2#* N
40 PRINT 2# * N
50 PRINT 2#-N
51 PRINT 2# -N
52 PRINT 2#- N
60 PRINT 2# - N
70 PRINT 2#/N
71 PRINT 2# /N
72 PRINT 2#/ N
80 PRINT 2# / N
```

### Error 7C - Space after TAB declaration

In Basic spaces have no significance (except in messages to be printed).
When processing a statement with a type declaration tag after a number and a space before :
* 7C - TAB( also suffers from the issue.

i.e. `PRINT TAB( 63);"*";` will function correctly. However `PRINT TAB (63);"*";` 
will print the 63rd element of an array named TAB.

#### Resolution

The Token used for TAB includes the `(` as part of the token. The token is actually `TAB(`.
The parser is not capable of handling the extra space. 
The interesting thing is no other functions include a `(` in their token. i.e. 
the token for the function PEEK has no `(` and does not suffer from the same issue as TAB

The solution then is to remove the additonal `(` leaving just `TAB`
The interpreter will just parse the expression following the TAB keyword
and if the expression is ` ( 63 )` - spacing not to important it will correctly 
parse the number consuming both brackets. 

Two changes are required
* Remove the `(` character from the TAB token in the keyword list - $1752 
* Add a padding byte at the end of the reserved keyword list. $1821
* Code at $213D that consumes the trailing `)` needs to be commented.

There is one issue:

When an existing program is loaded (pre-tokenised) form there will be an issue
with trailing `)`. Thus the program read would be interpreted as
`_TAB_10_)_` when infact the previous intention it shoudl have been `_TAB(_10_)_`
This is a result of the brackets not matching, ie the is an implicit `(` in the
TAB token.

Thus for backwards compatibility we need to consume a trailing `)` is it exists
To do this the code 

```
    SYNTAX  (')')   ;213d - rst 08h
    dec	hl	        ;213f - decrement back, will consume latter
```

needs to be replaced with a `CALL` to

```
TABERFIX:
    GETCHR  ; get next char RST 10
    cp	')' ; if close bracket
    ret z   ; found closing bracket, continue normally
    dec	hl  ; not a closing bracket, so DONT consume it.
    ret
```

Test Program -> Should consistently display `Hello` tabbed by 10

```
10 REM Spaces between brackets
11 PRINT TAB(10);"Hello"
12 PRINT TAB(10 );"Hello"
13 PRINT TAB( 10);"Hello"
14 PRINT TAB( 10 );"Hello"
20 REM No Brackets with spaces around the 10
21 PRINT TAB 10 ;"Hello"
22 PRINT TAB10 ;"Hello"
23 PRINT TAB 10;"Hello"
24 PRINT TAB10;"Hello"
30 REM Handle training ) for legacy code
31 PRINT TAB(10));"Hello"
32 PRINT TAB10);"Hello"
40 REM Spaces between brackets COMMA
41 PRINT TAB(10),"Hello"
42 PRINT TAB(10 ),"Hello"
43 PRINT TAB( 10),"Hello"
44 PRINT TAB( 10 ),"Hello"
```

### Error 8 - PRINT USING, sign at end of field

RULE: A PRINT USING statement with a negative sign at the end of the field prints
a negative sign after negative numbers and prints a space for positive numbers.
However, if the field specifiers in the string also has two asterisks at the
beginning of the field, the ROM prints an asterisk instead of a space after a
positive number.

```
PRINT USING "**####-";1234
```

Produces `**1234*` instead of `**1234-`

#### Resolution

Address 1099 Change instruction `LD B,C` to a `NOP`

## Model 3

The following are Specific to Model 3, typically related to issues porting code from Model 1

### Error 27 (29, 31) - Basic Entry Point

On the Model 1 The routine located at 06CCH contains the correct entry 
point to BASIC from a machine language routine that moved the stack pointer.
The routine resets the stack pointer to the last CLEAR n address

```
LD  BC,1A18H
JP  19AEH
```

The Model 3 does not have this routine, 06CCH is in the middle of the 
Model 3's modified list routine. This causes compatibility issues 
and additionally code itself in the ROM is incorrect
* Bug 27 - Location 0072H: Instruction here is an incorrect `JP 06CCH` 
* Bug 29 - Location 02C3H: Instruction here is an incorrect `JP 06CCH` 

In Model III BASIC, key SYSTEM ENTER then, at the *? prompt, press BREAK.
If you do this, the system will crash and restart, and you will get the CASS prompt.

#### Resolution

Re-implement (reinstate) the routine at 06CCH and code in this location 
relocated. Currently this is moved to startup message **TODO* but this will change 
in future, think this bug fix will move to Release 1.4

This fix requires 12 bytes

### Error 28 - Stack Pointer Initialisation

Instruction at 02B5H is LD SP,4288H. The instruction here was changed
to LD SP,4388H because the Model III moved up the start of BASIC by 100H.

### Error 30 - 32 Character Mode

0348H: Instruction here is LD A,(403DH). 403DH is the code that
is jumped to when port 0E0H has bit 3 reset (IOBUS interrupt).
403DH was used in the Model I to hold an image of what was outputted
to port 0FFH. If bit 3 of port 0FFH is set then the Model I is in the
32 characters per line video mode. Another screw up.
The Model III uses bit 2 of port 0ECH with image in 4210H.

034BH: Instruction here is AND 08H. Wrong bit is tested. The correct
instruction should be AND 04H. OP-ED: Once Radio Shack explained the
cursor movement when in the 32 characters per line video mode, Radio
Shack did not fix the code. And, Radio Shack made Logical Systems modify
TRSDOS 6 to behave the same way! However, with LSDOS 6.3, someone should
have had the guts to correct the code.

### Error 40 - Printer Status Routine

05D1H: The Printer Status Routine - carried over from Model 1 is broken
Rumor has it that this is a malicious destruction of the
"printer ready" function was used to hide the name "RON"
See 044BH which has the correct implementation. It is a relatively easy
fix to reinstate the correct code

Commit message:

Applied Bugfixes 1,7,7C to Model 3 (#32)
* Model 3 Asserts for fixed locations in last 2kb
* Model 3 Implemented BugFixes for 1, 7, 7C
* Updated Readme txt file

---------

Co-authored-by: Mark Pruden <git@mp.tidykiwi.com>

BUGFIXS.md, after:

# Bug Fixes

## Level 2 Basic

Affect both Model 1 and Model 3 See - 
[TRS-80 ROM Errors - Vernon Hester](https://www.trs-80.com/sub-rom-bugs.htm) - for further details.

### Error 1 - Line breaks printing numbers in 32 Char Mode

When BASIC prints an unformatted number, BASIC prints keeps the number on one video,
line. However, in the 32 character mode the rule is violated.

The issue is caused because the variable `LINLEN` (stored at $409D) - holds the number of
characters per line - is never updated when entering 32 character mode, it remains at 64,
so routines that use this variable, will be affected.

The updating of `LINLEN` was investigated, but this was incompatible with TRSDOS on the Model 3 which
used this memory space for other purposes, only initializing it when launching Basic.

#### Resolution

The fix requires ignores teh `LINLEN` variable, instead derives it from the shadow cassette port.

The instruction at `ld	a,(LINLEN)` at address $20DD needs to be replaced with a 
with a `JP DSPLINLTH` (below) fixes the issue.

Noting for one of the routines ($04F6) the order of instructions has to be modified 
so the last 2 instruction match those above. This was easy enough to do, since the 
other instructions ($0500-$0504) being moved are independent 

The new routine being jumped to is.

```
DSPLINLTH:
	ld	a,(CAST)	; get shadow copy of Cassette port
	and	CAST32		; check if 32 char mode
	ld	a,64		; assume 64 line length
	ret	z		    ; flag not set so return the 64
	srl	a		    ; set 32 line length
	ret			    ; and return it.
```

On the Model 3 the fix is almost identical except the shadow control port is `SHADEC`
($4210) and the mask used is `SHADM32` ($04)

This fix requires 11 bytes.

#### Test Program

The following test program should display numbers without line breaks

```
10 CLS:PRINT CHR$(23);
20 FOR X = 12345 TO 12360:PRINT X;:NEXT
```

### Error 5 - INT(DoubleValue) rounding issue

EXPECTATION: INT(value) should produce a result equal to or less than value.
However, if the value is double-precision (by definition), the ROM rounds value
to single-precision first, then performs the INT function. e.g.

```
PRINT INT(2.9999999) 
```
Produces `3` instead of `2`.

#### Resolution

Address 08A7 change `CALL NC,CONSD` to `NOP`'s

### Error 7 - Space after Type declaration Tag

In Basic spaces have no significance (except in messages to be printed).
When processing a statement with a type declaration tag after a number and a space before :
* 7A - An add or subtract -> the operator is applied as a unary operator for next argument
* 7B - A multiply or divide -> Syntax error.

#### Resolution

Modify the ROM to skip spaces after consuming the suffix, advancing HL past them.
Replacing the following code ($0EF2)

```
INFINE:	inc	hl
		jr	FINE	
```

With the instruction `jp INFINEFIX` which jumps to the following routine

```
INFINEFIX:
	inc	hl		; next program byte
	ld	a,(hl)		; get program byte
	cp	SPACE		; Is it a space
	jp 	nz,FINE		; NO - Exit and Continue
	jr	INFINEFIX	; loop around
```
The fix requires 9 extra bytes

#### Test Program

The following test program should consistently display a single result - regardless of the spaces

```
5 N=3
10 PRINT 2#+N
11 PRINT 2# +N
12 PRINT 2#+ N
20 PRINT 2# + N
30 PRINT 2#*N
31 PRINT 2# *N
32 PRINT 2#* N
40 PRINT 2# * N
50 PRINT 2#-N
51 PRINT 2# -N
52 PRINT 2#- N
60 PRINT 2# - N
70 PRINT 2#/N
71 PRINT 2# /N
72 PRINT 2#/ N
80 PRINT 2# / N
```

### Error 7C - Space after TAB declaration

In Basic spaces have no significance (except in messages to be printed).
When processing a statement with a type declaration tag after a number and a space before :
* 7C - TAB( also suffers from the issue.

i.e. `PRINT TAB( 63);"*";` will function correctly. However `PRINT TAB (63);"*";` 
will print the 63rd element of an array named TAB.

#### Resolution

The Token used for TAB includes the `(` as part of the token. The token is actually `TAB(`.
The parser is not capable of handling the extra space. 
The interesting thing is no other functions include a `(` in their token. i.e. 
the token for the function PEEK has no `(` and does not suffer from the same issue as TAB

The solution then is to remove the additonal `(` leaving just `TAB`
The interpreter will just parse the expression following the TAB keyword
and if the expression is ` ( 63 )` - spacing not to important it will correctly 
parse the number consuming both brackets. 

Two changes are required
* Remove the `(` character from the TAB token in the keyword list - $1752 
* Add a padding byte at the end of the reserved keyword list. $1821
* Code at $213D that consumes the trailing `)` needs to be commented.

There is one issue:

When an existing program is loaded (pre-tokenised) form there will be an issue
with trailing `)`. Thus the program read would be interpreted as
`_TAB_10_)_` when infact the previous intention it shoudl have been `_TAB(_10_)_`
This is a result of the brackets not matching, ie the is an implicit `(` in the
TAB token.

Thus for backwards compatibility we need to consume a trailing `)` is it exists
To do this the code 

```
    SYNTAX  (')')   ;213d - rst 08h
    dec	hl	        ;213f - decrement back, will consume latter
```

needs to be replaced with a `CALL` to

```
TABERFIX:
    GETCHR  ; get next char RST 10
    cp	')' ; if close bracket
    ret z   ; found closing bracket, continue normally
    dec	hl  ; not a closing bracket, so DONT consume it.
    ret
```

#### Test Program

The following test program should consistently display `Hello` indented by 10 spaces

```
10 REM Spaces between brackets
11 PRINT TAB(10);"Hello"
12 PRINT TAB(10 );"Hello"
13 PRINT TAB( 10);"Hello"
14 PRINT TAB( 10 );"Hello"
20 REM No Brackets with spaces around the 10
21 PRINT TAB 10 ;"Hello"
22 PRINT TAB10 ;"Hello"
23 PRINT TAB 10;"Hello"
24 PRINT TAB10;"Hello"
30 REM Handle training ) for legacy code
31 PRINT TAB(10));"Hello"
32 PRINT TAB10);"Hello"
40 REM Spaces between brackets COMMA
41 PRINT TAB(10),"Hello"
42 PRINT TAB(10 ),"Hello"
43 PRINT TAB( 10),"Hello"
44 PRINT TAB( 10 ),"Hello"
```

### Error 8 - PRINT USING, sign at end of field

RULE: A PRINT USING statement with a negative sign at the end of the field prints
a negative sign after negative numbers and prints a space for positive numbers.
However, if the field specifiers in the string also has two asterisks at the
beginning of the field, the ROM prints an asterisk instead of a space after a
positive number.

```
PRINT USING "**####-";1234
```

Produces `**1234*` instead of `**1234-`

#### Resolution

Address 1099 Change instruction `LD B,C` to a `NOP`

## Model 3

The following are Specific to Model 3, typically related to issues porting code from Model 1

### Error 27 (29, 31) - Basic Entry Point

On the Model 1 The routine located at 06CCH contains the correct entry 
point to BASIC from a machine language routine that moved the stack pointer.
The routine resets the stack pointer to the last CLEAR n address

```
LD  BC,1A18H
JP  19AEH
```

The Model 3 does not have this routine, 06CCH is in the middle of the 
Model 3's modified list routine. This causes compatibility issues 
and additionally code itself in the ROM is incorrect
* Bug 27 - Location 0072H: Instruction here is an incorrect `JP 06CCH` 
* Bug 29 - Location 02C3H: Instruction here is an incorrect `JP 06CCH` 

In Model III BASIC, key SYSTEM ENTER then, at the *? prompt, press BREAK.
If you do this, the system will crash and restart, and you will get the CASS prompt.

#### Resolution

Re-implement (reinstate) the routine at 06CCH and code in this location 
relocated. Currently this is moved to startup message **TODO* but this will change 
in future, think this bug fix will move to Release 1.4

This fix requires 12 bytes

### Error 28 - Stack Pointer Initialisation

Instruction at 02B5H is LD SP,4288H. The instruction here was changed
to LD SP,4388H because the Model III moved up the start of BASIC by 100H.

### Error 30 - 32 Character Mode

0348H: Instruction here is LD A,(403DH). 403DH is the code that
is jumped to when port 0E0H has bit 3 reset (IOBUS interrupt).
403DH was used in the Model I to hold an image of what was outputted
to port 0FFH. If bit 3 of port 0FFH is set then the Model I is in the
32 characters per line video mode. Another screw up.
The Model III uses bit 2 of port 0ECH with image in 4210H.

034BH: Instruction here is AND 08H. Wrong bit is tested. The correct
instruction should be AND 04H. OP-ED: Once Radio Shack explained the
cursor movement when in the 32 characters per line video mode, Radio
Shack did not fix the code. And, Radio Shack made Logical Systems modify
TRSDOS 6 to behave the same way! However, with LSDOS 6.3, someone should
have had the guts to correct the code.

### Error 40 - Printer Status Routine

05D1H: The Printer Status Routine - carried over from Model 1 is broken
Rumor has it that this is a malicious destruction of the
"printer ready" function was used to hide the name "RON"
See 044BH which has the correct implementation. It is a relatively easy
fix to reinstate the correct code
